My Indepedent Study Project for Fall 2021

The original plan I had for my independent study project was to create a website that gave book recommendations to a user based on their interests and personality. The biggest mistake I made surrounding the way that I chose my topic was that I produced an idea first and got so excited by it that I did not fully think about what the process would look like. Because of this, my idea turned out to be much more complicated than I anticipated it to be, but in the process of trying to complete my goal I learned a lot. When I concluded that I would not be able to complete my project the way I wanted it to be, it discouraged me a lot, but I am grateful that I went through the learning experience that I did because it taught me a lot.

After doing research about how I would put my project into motion, I realized that it would involve a great deal of data science, something that I was completely unfamiliar with. I realized that I had to create a recommender system and learned about the multiple types of systems I could use. The main two types of recommender systems that kept showing up through my research were content filtering and collaborative filtering. Content filtering is recommending a product to the user by taking something that they have already shown interest in and displaying something similar. An example of this would be the recommender system implemented in Amazon, where they recommend related products to the one that you are viewing. Collaborative filtering takes data from other similar users to recommend an item to a user. An example of this would be another recommender system implemented in Amazon, where they observe the customers who bought that item in the past and give recordation’s based on other items they have bought.

For my recommender system I was learning more towards making one that used collaborative filtering, because I wanted to take a more personal approach. The way I wanted to implement my recommender system through my website was through a quiz, where I asked the user multiple questions to understand their personality and then give them a book recommendation based on that. Content filtering would not have been ideal for this, because I wanted to base my recommendation from more information than just other books that the user enjoyed. After doing this research, I completed the home page of my website and the quiz pages, which can be found in the folder with all of my html code, and after that I got into creating my recommender system and how I would connect it to the code that I already made. This is where I hit a dead end because the creation and implementation process of my recommender system was not something that I fully planned for.

I started with making a home page before diving into the actual recommender system, because it helped me get clear about how I wanted to get the point of my project across. I created a button on that page leading that would lead to the actual quiz, and I thought after doing it would lead me to the point where I would need to create my recommender system to supply my first quiz page. I then fully dove into research of how I would go about making the type of recommender system that I wanted to create for the specific purposes of my project. The first piece of information that I gathered is that I would need to find a dataset about books that I would need to read information from. The biggest obstacle I ran into at this point was finding the right dataset, and I was specifically looking for one that had set group of genres that each book would fall under.

I thought that genres would be the biggest factor I would need to complete the goal I had for my project, because in a way genres are like the personality of a book. My idea was that if I could figure out what the user's personality is like and what they are interested in, it would be simple to connect that to a book genre. The dataset I was looking for would also include the rankings of a book or the data would simply be full of high-ranking books, because obviously I would want to recommend books to the user that are good and not just ones that fit into the genre they connect the most with. Finding the specific dataset that I wanted to use was more difficult than I thought, because not a lot included genres, but only rankings. Another problem then came when I eventually found a dataset that included genres though, because I underestimated just how many genres there would be.

I was thoroughly overwhelmed looking through how many genres I would have to consider from the dataset that I chose, but I ignored this problem for the time being and started my research for how I would even go about reading from a dataset. This research only furthered my confusion and worry about whether I would be able to complete my goal, because I started learning about CSV files. The purpose of a CSV file is to make it easier to use data from a dataset in a program. Converting a dataset into a CSV file separates the information by commas, making it simple to read the data just like you would from any other file by using programming. The issue that arose from this though is that I have barely even worked with files in general, and the limited number of times that I have they have contained not a small amount of data. The datasets that I would be reading from to fully create this project are huge, because of the sheer number of books they hold, so this was just another thing that overwhelmed me on top of everything else.

From this point my work on this project was purely research based, because frankly I had no idea how to work with all the information I have gathered. By this time, I realized how much I still needed to learn before I could create my goal, and it discouraged me a lot. I came into the start of my independent study experience super motivated to complete the idea that I had in mind because it centered around something I am passionate about, which is reading. That fact just made me even more excited to create it but also even more disappointed realizing that it is just not possible for me to do at my current skill level. Even though there are book recommender systems that exist already, making one of my own that used something as interesting as the user's personality just seemed like such a cool concept to me.

That ties to one of the biggest lessons I learned from this process, is that a goal can only be put into reality when it is backed up by the skill it takes to complete that goal. My excitement blinded me to the fact that I am still inexperienced in the field of computer science, and that there is nothing wrong with completing projects that might be seen as simple to build yourself up to complex projects like the one I attempted to do. I tend to have unrealistically grand expectations for myself and then get mad at myself when I cannot live up to them, which is something that contributed to the reason why I picked such a difficult project. I do not regret the project idea that I chose to attempt because of the amount of information I gained about data science, a field that I knew little about before this process. I did not know all the work that went into the creation of a recommender system, and now I have much more respect for the programmers that create the ones that make my life easier daily.

After figuring out I would not be able to fully complete the project I set out to do, I produced ideas of how to partly complete the project that I wanted to do without data science. I did not have time to fully put these ideas into practice because of how much time I spent researching how to carry out my original plan, but instead of using a dataset I thought I could choose a group of a few specific books to use in my quiz. This would significantly limit the number of books I would be able to recommend compared to if I were using a dataset, but it is something more doable for my skill level. The concept behind this kind of program is that I would make a counter variable that provides a point to the book that the choice the user makes corresponds to and then goes to the result page based on which book has the greatest number of points. I provided a few examples of how I would go about doing this in the javascript and python folders I have included in this project, without fully putting it in practice because that is not what I have focused my research on through my project process.

In this situation, my lack of experience made it easy for me to underestimate how difficult this project would be to make a reality. For my future endeavors if I have an idea, I am going to focus more on what it takes to complete my goal before starting it instead of diving headfirst. Even though I am a bit dismayed that I was not able to complete the project I set out to do, this process helped me grow a lot by teaching me how much I still do not know. It is compelling to know that there are so many concepts in computer science I have yet to learn, and this task has motivated me to want to learn even more. I would not say that after this process I am going to pursue data science, but when I gain more knowledge down the line in my studies, I am open to returning to this project and fully completing it how I wanted it to be originally.
